---
title: "Seminar on Convex Optimization for Dynamical Systems (FAU Summer Semester 2024)"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2012-03-01-talk-1
venue: "FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, Department of Mathematics"
date: 2024-07-04
location: "Erlangen, Germany"
---

This presentation occurred for the "Convex Optimization for Dynamical Systems" master's seminar at Frierich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg.

## Abstract: 
Region of Attraction (ROA) estimation problems yield interesting optimization approaches when considering polynomial dynamics. In this study, a method presented in [2] is shown, providing an outer approximation to the ROA, solving a Polynomial Optimization problem, induced by occupation measures, approximating an initial infinite dimensional problem with a hierarchy of finite dimensional linear matrix inequalities, with convergence for an arbitrarily large polynomial degree.


## Introduction
The problem relies on computing the Region of Attraction (ROA) of a target set, on a nonlinear dynamical system. The domain sets are $X, U, X_T$, respectively for the trajectories, control, and terminal state.

% \begin{definition}[Region of Attraction (ROA) \cite{henrion2013convex}]
%     The Region of Attraction of a dynamical system is the set of all initial states that can be directed to a target set, with an admissible control, while remaining in the state-constraint set.
% \end{definition}


\begin{align}
    \dot{x}(t) = f(t, x(t), u(t)) \quad t \in [0,T]
\end{align}

where it is considered that each entry is polynomial, i.e., $f_i \in \mathbb{R}[t,x,u], i \in \mathbb{Z}_{[1,n]}$.
% \begin{itemize}
%     \item $x(t) \in \mathbb{R}^n$ state
%     \item $u(t)\in \mathbb{R}^m$ control input
%     \item terminal time $T>0$
% \end{itemize}

% \begin{align}
%     f_i \in \mathbb{R}[t,x,u], \quad i \in \mathbb{Z}_{[1,n]}
% \end{align}

The set of all admissible trajectories starting from $x_0$ is given by:
% \begin{nalign}
%     \mathcal{X}(x_0) := \{
%     x(.) : \exists u(.) \in U \text{ s.t. }
%     \dot{x}(t) = f(t, x(t), u(t)) \text{ a.e. } \\
%     x(0) = x_0, x(t) \in X, x(T) \in X_T, \forall t \in [0,T]\}
%     \label{eq:admissible_trajectories}
% \end{nalign}
\begin{nalign}
    \mathcal{X}(x_0) := \{
    x(.) : \exists u(.) \in \mathcal{U} \text{ s.t. }
    \dot{x}(t) = f(t, x(t), u(t)) \text{ a.e., }
    x(0) = x_0, x(t) \in X, x(T) \in X_T, \forall t \in [0,T]\}
    \label{eq:admissible_trajectories}
\end{nalign}
where $\mathcal{U}$ denotes the set of all control functions, and $x(.)$ is absolutely continuous. Also, $\text{a.e.}$ stands for "almost everywhere" in a Lebesgue measure or a weak sense.

The defined sets $X, U, X_T$ form semialgebraic constraints that restrict state and control input.
\begin{align}
x(t) \in X := \{ 
x \in \mathbb{R}^n : g_i^X(x) \geq 0, 
i \in \mathbb{Z}_{[1,n_X]}
\}, \quad t \in [0,T] \\
u(t) \in U := \{ 
u \in \mathbb{R}^m : g_i^U(u) \geq 0, 
i \in \mathbb{Z}_{[1,n_U]}
\}, \quad t \in [0,T]
\end{align}
where $g_i^X \in \mathbb{R}[x], g_i^U \in \mathbb{R}[x]$, and the terminal state $x(T)$ is constrained to lie in the basic semialgebraic set
\begin{align}
X_T := \{ 
x \in \mathbb{R}^n : g_i^{X_T}(x) \geq 0, 
i \in \mathbb{Z}_{[1,n_T]}
\} \subset X, \quad g_i^{X_T}\in \mathbb{R}[x]
\end{align}
% with $g_i^{X_T}\in \mathbb{R}[x]$. 

\begin{definition}[Region of Attraction (ROA) \cite{main_text_henrion_korda}]
 The Region of Attraction (ROA) of a dynamical system is the set of all initial states that can be directed to a target set, with an admissible control, while remaining in the state-constraint set.
The ROA is denoted by
\begin{align}
    X_0 = \{ x_0 \in X : \mathcal{X}(x_0) \neq \emptyset \}
\end{align}
\end{definition}

\subsection{Assumptions}

\begin{enumerate}
    \item \textbf{Assumption 1: $X$, $U$, and $X_T$ are compact}. Therefore, the sets are also bounded.
    \item Assumption 2: The control system satisfies $\lambda(X_0) = \lambda(\bar{X}_0)$. Thus, the volume of the relaxed region has the same volume as the ROA measure.
    \item Assumption 3: Archimedian semialgebraic sets. Allows us to use quadratic modules (weighted SOS).
\end{enumerate}

\begin{definition}[Quadratic Module \cite{quadraticmodule}]
The quadratic module generated by the polynomials $g_1, \ldots, g_m$ is the set
\begin{align}
    Q(g_1, \ldots, g_m) := 
    \left\{ \sigma_0 + \sum_{i=1}^m g_i \sigma_i : \sigma_0, \ldots, \sigma_m \in \Sigma[x] \right\}
\end{align}
\end{definition}
\begin{definition}[Archimedian semialgebraic sets]
The Quadratic module $Q(g_1, \ldots, g_m)$ is said to be Archimedean if $\exists N \in \mathbb{N} : N - (x_1^2 + \ldots + x_n^2) \in Q(g_1, \ldots, g_m)$.
\end{definition}
Assumptions 1 and 3 are sufficient conditions to apply Putinar's theorem \cite{putinar1993positive}, and then a Quadratic module can be a representation of the semialgebraic sets.

\begin{theorem}[Putinar \cite{putinar1993positive}]
Suppose the polynomials $g_1, \ldots, g_m$ are such that $Q(g_1, \ldots, g_m)$ is Archimedean. If $f \in \mathbb{R}[x]$ is positive on the set $K$, then $f \in Q(g_1, \ldots, g_m)$.
\end{theorem}

## References
[1] ApS, M. Mosek optimizer api for julia.

[2] Henrion, D., and Korda, M. Convex computation of the region of attraction of polynomial control systems. IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control 59 (08 2012).

[3] Hirsch, M. W. Differential topology, vol. 33. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.

[4] O’Meara, O. T. Introduction to quadratic forms, vol. 117. Springer, 2013.

[5] Putinar, M. Positive polynomials on compact semi-algebraic sets. Indiana University Mathematics Journal 42, 3 (1993),
969–984.
